Add guidance on how to use LibSQL with Astro DB (#8955)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/guides/astro-db.mdx

</ReadMore>

## LibSQL

<p><Since pkg="@astrojs/db" v="0.14.0" /></p>

Alternatively to Astro Studio, Astro DB can connect to any LibSQL server. You can use an offering from any platform that exposes the Hrana protocol of the server or host it yourself.

To connecto Astro DB to a LibSQL instead of Studio, set the following environment variables:
- `ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL`: the connection URL to your LibSQL server
- `ASTRO_DB_APP_TOKEN`: the auth token to your LibSQL server

> The environment variables have to be set during `astro build`, `astro db push --remote` and during runtime if your project use Astro DB on SSR pages.

Reviewer: Can we explain or give an example of what someone needs to do to make sure these are set at the correct time? It's one thing to say they "have to be set during..", but it's helpful to show what they will need to do to make that happen. If simply setting the variables were enough, then this sentence wouldn't be necessary, right? So what else do they have to make sure they do?

Author: Setting the environment variables is enough, but they have to do it in all places being used. So, for example, when deploying to Vercel you need the environment variable set locally when you run `astro db push --remote` to apply the schemas _and_ on Vercel to connect to the DB.

Using Studio, the token only needs to be set on Vercel since the local run of `astro db push --remote` will use the user token.

Reviewer: So, would this be added to the command as a flag when run? Or just added in the appropriate places (one and done, like in a `.env` file or in a dashboard somewhere? I think this is what I'm getting at. 

"Set when you run" could mean "pre-set, and available somewhere" or something you need to provide each time.

Author: I made the examples show the `.env` file so people put it there. There is multiple ways to do it along with security considerations, but that will depend on how their project and their connection to LibSQL is structured. I don't think there is much point going into details on Astro Docs vs following the docs of the hosting they are using

### URL scheme and host

LibSQL supports both HTTP and WebSockets as the transport protocol for for a remote server. It also supports using a local file or an in-memory DB. Those can be configured using the following URL schemes in the connection URL:

- `memory:` will use an in-memory DB. Host must be empty in this case.
- `file:` will use a local file. The host is the path to the file (`file:path/to/file.db`).
- `libsql:` will use a remote server through the protocol preferred by the library (this might be different across versions). The host is the address of the server (`libsql://your.server.io`).
- `libsql+http:` will use a remote server through HTTP. `libsql+https:` can be used to enable a secure connection. The host is the same as for `libsql:`.
- `ws:` will use a remote server through WebSockets. `wss` can be used to enable a secure connection. The host is the same as for `libsql:`.

### `encryptionKey`

LibSQL has native support for encrypted databases. Passing this search parameter will enable encryption using the given key:

- `file:path/to/file.db?encryptionKey=your-encryption-key`
- `libsql://your.server.io?encryptionKey=your-encryption-key`

### `syncUrl`

> Passing a separate connection URL on this search parameter to turn the DB into an embedded replica of another of another database. This should only be used with the schemes `file:` and `memory:`. The parameter must be URL encoded.
> 
> Embedded replicas are a feature of LibSQL clients that enables a full synchronized copy of your database on a local file or in memory for ultra-fast reads. Writes are sent to a remote database defined on the `syncUrl` and synchronized with the local copy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Embedded replicas are a feature of LibSQL clients that enables a full synchronized copy of your database on a local file or in memory for ultra-fast reads. Writes are sent to a remote database defined on the `syncUrl` and synchronized with the local copy.

Use this property to pass a separate connection URL to turn the DB into an embedded replica of another of another database. This should only be used with the schemes `file:` and `memory:`. The parameter must be URL encoded.
```
These read better when the order is swapped!

Reviewer 2: I noticed a repeat that seems wrong to me: `replica of another of another database` > `replica of another database` (first paragraph in the original, or second paragraph in Sarah's suggestion).

For example, to have an in-memory embedded replica of a database on `libsql://your.server.io`, you can set the connection URL to `memory:?syncUrl=libsql%3A%2F%2Fyour.server.io`.

### `syncInterval`

> Interval between embedded replicas synchronizations in seconds. By default it only synchronizes on startup and after writes.

Reviewer: Could also use an example people can see

</ReadMore>

## LibSQL

<p><Since pkg="@astrojs/db" v="0.14.0" /></p>

> Astro DB can connect to any LibSQL server from any platform that exposes the Hrana protocol of the server, or host it yourself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astro DB can connect to any LibSQL server from any platform that exposes the Hrana protocol of the server, or can be self-hosted.
```

> Astro DB can connect to any LibSQL server from any platform that exposes the Hrana protocol of the server, or can be self-hosted.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Astro DB can connect to any libSQL server from any platform that exposes the libSQL remote protocol of the server, or can be self-hosted.
```

We're moving away from calling it "Hrana", so not using it here would be a huge help 🫶

Reviewer 4: As a reader, this also makes it a lot easier to understand what it actually is in this context as well.

Author: The name everywhere I see is LibSQL with capital L, is that changing too?

Author: I looked again, and there seems to be a mix. I'll normalize our references to be `libSQL` but as a heads up @notrab , on Turso docs and the repos the links and titles are mostly using "LibSQL" while the content on the pages are using "libSQL".

> To connect Astro DB to a LibSQL database, set the following environment variables:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To connect Astro DB to a libSQL database, set the following environment variables:
```

We tend to refer to `libSQL` with a lowercase `l`. I hope this isn't too much trouble to find and replace all 🫶

> To connecto Astro DB to a LibSQL instead of Studio, set the following environment variables:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To connect Astro DB to a LibSQL instance, set the following environment variables:
```
What's the noun here, is it "instance"?

Author: I think "database" would be the most appropriate. At first I thought of server but it can be a local file or even in memory.

- `ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL`: the connection URL to your LibSQL server
- `ASTRO_DB_APP_TOKEN`: the auth token to your LibSQL server

> The [commands for deploying and pushing changes](#deploy-with-a-studio-connection) to your database are the same when using LibSQL as when connecting to a Studio hosted database. However, both of your environment variables need to be set locally when running commands with the `--remote` option like `astro build` and `astro db push`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The [commands for deploying and pushing changes](#deploy-with-a-studio-connection) to your database are the same when using LibSQL as when connecting to an Astro Studio hosted database. However, both of your environment variables need to be set locally when running commands with the `--remote` option like `astro build` and `astro db push`.
```

Possibly make this a bit more explicit for those who may be linking to this specific section.

Reviewer: Love it, thanks!

Details of the LibSQL connection (e.g. encryption key, replication, sync interval) can be configured as query parameters in the remote connection URL.

For example, to have a local file work as an embedded replica to an encrypted LibSQL server, you can set the following environment variables:

```env title=".env"
ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL=file://local-copy.db?encryptionKey=your-encryption-key&syncInterval=60&syncUrl=libsql%3A%2F%2Fyour.server.io
ASTRO_DB_APP_TOKEN=token-to-your-remote-url
```

### URL scheme and host

> LibSQL supports both HTTP and WebSockets as the transport protocol for for a remote server. It also supports using a local file or an in-memory DB. Those can be configured using the following URL schemes in the connection URL:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
LibSQL supports both HTTP and WebSockets as the transport protocol for a remote server. It also supports using a local file or an in-memory DB. Those can be configured using the following URL schemes in the connection URL:
```

> - `memory:` will use an in-memory DB. Host must be empty in this case.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- `memory:` will use an in-memory DB. The host must be empty in this case.
```

### `encryptionKey`

LibSQL has native support for encrypted databases. Passing this search parameter will enable encryption using the given key:

```env title=".env"
ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL=file:path/to/file.db?encryptionKey=your-encryption-key
```

### `syncUrl`

Embedded replicas are a feature of LibSQL clients that enables a full synchronized copy of your database on a local file or in memory for ultra-fast reads. Writes are sent to a remote database defined on the `syncUrl` and synchronized with the local copy.

Use this property to pass a separate connection URL to turn the DB into an embedded replica of another database. This should only be used with the schemes `file:` and `memory:`. The parameter must be URL encoded.

For example, to have an in-memory embedded replica of a database on `libsql://your.server.io`, you can set the connection URL as such:

```env title=".env"
ASTRO_DB_REMOTE_URL=memory:?syncUrl=libsql%3A%2F%2Fyour.server.io
```

### `syncInterval`

Interval between embedded replicas synchronizations in seconds. By default it only synchronizes on startup and after writes.

> This property is only used when `syncUrl` is also set. For example, to set an in-memory empbedded replica to synchronize every minute set the following environment variable:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This property is only used when `syncUrl` is also set. For example, to set an in-memory embedded replica to synchronize every minute set the following environment variable:
```
